17-aws-elastic-beanstalk-blue-green-deployment-demo/README.md, before:

# 17: AWS Elastic Beanstalk Blue-Green Deployment Demo

Using **AWS Elastic Beanstalk** to achieve zero-downtime deployments through blue-green deployment strategy.
Elastic Beanstalk creates your application, launches an environment, makes an application version, then deploys your code into the environment.

## 🎯 What This Demo Does

This Terraform project creates:

- **Blue Environment** (Production) - Running Application v1.0
- **Green Environment** (Staging) - Running Application v2.0
- Complete infrastructure with load balancers, auto-scaling, and health checks
- Ability to instantly swap traffic between environments with zero downtime

## 🏗️ Architecture Overview

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                  Elastic Beanstalk Application              │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│                                                             │
│  ┌──────────────────────┐      ┌──────────────────────┐   │
│  │  Blue Environment    │      │  Green Environment   │   │
│  │  (Production)        │      │  (Staging)           │   │
│  ├──────────────────────┤      ├──────────────────────┤   │
│  │  Version 1.0         │      │  Version 2.0         │   │
│  │  Load Balancer       │      │  Load Balancer       │   │
│  │  Auto Scaling        │      │  Auto Scaling        │   │
│  │  Health Checks       │      │  Health Checks       │   │
│  │                      │      │                      │   │
│  │  URL: my-app-blue... │      │  URL: my-app-green..│   │
│  └──────────────────────┘      └──────────────────────┘   │
│           │                              │                 │
│           └──────────────┬───────────────┘                 │
│                          │                                 │
│                 CNAME Swap (Instant)                       │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

## 📋 Prerequisites

1. **AWS Account** with appropriate permissions
2. **Terraform** (>= 1.0) installed
3. **AWS CLI** configured with credentials
4. **PowerShell** (for packaging scripts)
5. **Node.js** (optional, for local testing)

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Step 1: Package the Applications

First, package both versions of the application:

```powershell
.\package-apps.sh
```

This creates:

- `app-v1/app-v1.zip` - Version 1.0 (Blue)
- `app-v2/app-v2.zip` - Version 2.0 (Green)

### Step 2: Initialize Terraform

```bash
terraform init
```

### Step 3: Review the Plan

```bash
terraform plan
```

### Step 4: Deploy Infrastructure

```bash
terraform apply
```

⏳ **Note:** The deployment takes approximately 15-20 minutes as Elastic Beanstalk provisions:

- EC2 instances
- Application Load Balancers
- Auto Scaling Groups
- Security Groups
- CloudWatch monitoring

### Step 5: View the Outputs

After deployment completes, Terraform will display:

```bash
terraform output instructions
```

You'll see the URLs for both environments:

- **Blue Environment (Production):** `http://my-app-bluegreen-blue-xxxxxx.elasticbeanstalk.com`
- **Green Environment (Staging):** `http://my-app-bluegreen-green-xxxxxx.elasticbeanstalk.com`

## 🔵 Testing the Blue Environment (Production - v1.0)

Visit the Blue environment URL. You should see:

- **Version 1.0** displayed prominently
- **Blue color scheme**
- **"PRODUCTION" badge**
- Basic feature set

## 🟢 Testing the Green Environment (Staging - v2.0)

Visit the Green environment URL. You should see:

- **Version 2.0** displayed prominently
- **Green color scheme**
- **"STAGING" badge**
- New features listed:
  - Refreshed UI with modern design
  - Improved performance
  - Enhanced security features
  - Better analytics tracking
  - Critical bug fixes

## 🔄 Performing the Blue-Green Swap

Once you've verified the Green environment is working correctly, perform the swap:

### Option 1: Using the PowerShell Script (Recommended)

```powershell
.\swap-environments.ps1
```

The script will:

1. Automatically read environment names from Terraform
2. Ask for confirmation
3. Perform the CNAME swap
4. Display status and next steps

### Option 2: Using AWS CLI Directly

```bash
aws elasticbeanstalk swap-environment-cnames \
  --source-environment-name my-app-bluegreen-blue \
  --destination-environment-name my-app-bluegreen-green \
  --region us-east-1
```

### Option 3: Using AWS Console (Step-by-Step with Screenshots)

**Step 1:** Open the AWS Console

- Navigate to [AWS Elastic Beanstalk Console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/elasticbeanstalk)
- Ensure you're in the correct region (us-east-1 by default)

**Step 2:** Select Your Application

- In the Applications list, click on **my-app-bluegreen**
- You'll see both environments listed (Blue and Green)

**Step 3:** Choose an Environment to Swap

- Click on either the **Blue** or **Green** environment name
- (You can start from either environment - the result is the same)

**Step 4:** Access the Swap Action

- Click the **Actions** button (top right)
- From the dropdown menu, select **Swap environment URLs**

**Step 5:** Select the Target Environment

- A dialog will appear asking which environment to swap with
- Select the other environment from the dropdown
  - If you started from Blue, select Green
  - If you started from Green, select Blue

**Step 6:** Confirm the Swap

- Review the warning message about traffic redirection
- Click the **Swap** button to confirm

**Step 7:** Monitor the Swap

- The environments will show "Updating" status
- Wait 1-2 minutes for the swap to complete
- Both environments will return to "Ok" (green) status

**Step 8:** Verify Success

- Note that the **URLs have been swapped**
- The environment names stay the same, but the URLs are exchanged
- Visit both URLs to confirm the swap worked

## ✅ Verifying the Swap

After the swap completes (1-2 minutes), verify:

1. **Blue URL now shows v2.0:**

   ```
   Visit: <blue-url>
   Expected: "Welcome to Version 2.0 - Green Environment"
   ```

2. **Green URL now shows v1.0:**

   ```
   Visit: <green-url>
   Expected: "Welcome to Version 1.0 - Blue Environment"
   ```

3. **Zero Downtime:** Your production traffic seamlessly moved from v1.0 to v2.0!

## 🔙 Rolling Back

If you need to rollback to the previous version:

```powershell
# Simply run the swap again!
.\swap-environments.ps1
```

The swap is instant and bidirectional - the previous production environment is still running the old version.

## 📊 Key Features Demonstrated

### 1. **Zero-Downtime Deployment**

- Traffic switches instantly at the DNS level
- No service interruption
- Users experience seamless transition

### 2. **Easy Rollback**

- Previous version still running in the other environment
- Instant rollback by swapping again
- No need to redeploy

### 3. **Safe Testing**

- Test new version in production-like environment
- Same infrastructure configuration
- Isolated from production traffic

### 4. **Production Parity**

- Both environments identical
- Same instance types, scaling, and configuration
- Eliminates "works on staging" issues

## 🏷️ Resource Tagging

All resources are tagged with:

- `Project: BlueGreenDeployment`
- `Environment: Demo`
- `ManagedBy: Terraform`

## 💰 Cost Considerations

This demo creates:

- 2 Application Load Balancers (~$16/month each)
- 2-4 EC2 instances (depending on auto-scaling)
- S3 bucket for application versions
- CloudWatch monitoring

**Estimated Monthly Cost:** $50-100 USD (depending on instance types and usage)

**To minimize costs:**

- Use `t3.micro` instances (default)
- Destroy resources when not in use: `terraform destroy`
- Set appropriate auto-scaling limits

## 🧹 Cleanup

To destroy all resources:

```bash
terraform destroy
```

**Warning:** This will delete:

- Both Elastic Beanstalk environments
- Application Load Balancers
- EC2 instances
- S3 bucket (if empty)
- All associated resources

## 📝 Customization

### Change AWS Region

Edit `variables.tf`:

```hcl
variable "aws_region" {
  default = "us-west-2"  # Change to your preferred region
}
```

### Change Instance Type

Edit `variables.tf`:

```hcl
variable "instance_type" {
  default = "t3.small"  # Upgrade for better performance
}
```

### Modify Application Name

Edit `variables.tf`:

```hcl
variable "app_name" {
  default = "my-custom-app"
}
```

## 🔍 Troubleshooting

### Environment Health Issues

Check environment health:

```bash
aws elasticbeanstalk describe-environment-health \
  --environment-name my-app-bluegreen-blue \
  --attribute-names All \
  --region us-east-1
```

### Deployment Failures

View recent events:

```bash
aws elasticbeanstalk describe-events \
  --environment-name my-app-bluegreen-blue \
  --max-records 50 \
  --region us-east-1
```

### Application Logs

Access logs through:

1. AWS Console → Elastic Beanstalk → Environment → Logs
2. Or request logs via CLI:

```bash
aws elasticbeanstalk request-environment-info \
  --environment-name my-app-bluegreen-blue \
  --info-type tail \
  --region us-east-1
```

## 🔗 Comparison with Azure

| Feature          | Azure App Service | AWS Elastic Beanstalk |
| ---------------- | ----------------- | --------------------- |
| Service Type     | PaaS              | PaaS                  |
| Deployment Slots | Native feature    | Separate Environments |
| Swap Mechanism   | Slot Swap         | CNAME Swap            |
| Swap Speed       | Instant           | 1-2 minutes           |
| Rollback         | One-click swap    | One-click swap        |
| Cost             | Per slot          | Per environment       |

## 📚 Learning Resources

- [AWS Elastic Beanstalk Documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/elasticbeanstalk/)
- [Blue-Green Deployment Best Practices](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/wellarchitected/latest/framework/welcome.html)
- [Terraform AWS Provider](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/aws/latest/docs)

## 🎓 What You've Learned

✅ How to implement blue-green deployments on AWS  
✅ Elastic Beanstalk environment management  
✅ Zero-downtime deployment strategies  
✅ Infrastructure as Code with Terraform  
✅ AWS CLI for environment swapping  
✅ Production-safe deployment practices

## "aws_elastic_beanstalk_environment" Settings

| **Setting**    | **Why?**                                                                             |
| -------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| **IAM**        | Without `IamInstanceProfile`, the server can't download your code.                   |
| **Networking** | If you want a Load Balancer, you must set `EnvironmentType` to `LoadBalanced`.       |
| **Capacity**   | You must tell it the `InstanceType` (e.g., `t3.micro`) so you don't get a huge bill. |
| **Updates**    | You need `DeploymentPolicy` so your site doesn't go down during an update.           |

Commit message:

feat: Implement AWS Policy and Governance setup with IAM policies, Config rules, and S3 bucket management

17-aws-elastic-beanstalk-blue-green-deployment-demo/README.md, after:

# 17: AWS Elastic Beanstalk Blue-Green Deployment Demo

Using **AWS Elastic Beanstalk** to achieve zero-downtime deployments through blue-green deployment strategy.
Elastic Beanstalk creates your application, launches an environment, makes an application version, then deploys your code into the environment.

## 🎯 What This Demo Does

This Terraform project creates:

- **Blue Environment** (Production) - Running Application v1.0
- **Green Environment** (Staging) - Running Application v2.0
- Complete infrastructure with load balancers, auto-scaling, and health checks
- Ability to instantly swap traffic between environments with zero downtime

## 🏗️ Architecture Overview

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                  Elastic Beanstalk Application              │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│                                                             │
│  ┌──────────────────────┐      ┌──────────────────────┐   │
│  │  Blue Environment    │      │  Green Environment   │   │
│  │  (Production)        │      │  (Staging)           │   │
│  ├──────────────────────┤      ├──────────────────────┤   │
│  │  Version 1.0         │      │  Version 2.0         │   │
│  │  Load Balancer       │      │  Load Balancer       │   │
│  │  Auto Scaling        │      │  Auto Scaling        │   │
│  │  Health Checks       │      │  Health Checks       │   │
│  │                      │      │                      │   │
│  │  URL: my-app-blue... │      │  URL: my-app-green..│   │
│  └──────────────────────┘      └──────────────────────┘   │
│           │                              │                 │
│           └──────────────┬───────────────┘                 │
│                          │                                 │
│                 CNAME Swap (Instant)                       │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

## 📋 Prerequisites

1. **AWS Account** with appropriate permissions
2. **Terraform** (>= 1.0) installed
3. **AWS CLI** configured with credentials
4. **PowerShell** (for packaging scripts)
5. **Node.js** (optional, for local testing)

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Step 1: Package the Applications

First, package both versions of the application:

```powershell
.\package-apps.sh
```

This creates:

- `app-v1/app-v1.zip` - Version 1.0 (Blue)
- `app-v2/app-v2.zip` - Version 2.0 (Green)

### Step 2: Initialize Terraform

```bash
terraform init
```

### Step 3: Review the Plan

```bash
terraform plan
```

### Step 4: Deploy Infrastructure

```bash
terraform apply
```

⏳ **Note:** The deployment takes approximately 15-20 minutes as Elastic Beanstalk provisions:

- EC2 instances
- Application Load Balancers
- Auto Scaling Groups
- Security Groups
- CloudWatch monitoring

### Step 5: View the Outputs

After deployment completes, Terraform will display:

```bash
terraform output instructions
```

You'll see the URLs for both environments:

- **Blue Environment (Production):** `http://my-app-bluegreen-blue-xxxxxx.elasticbeanstalk.com`
- **Green Environment (Staging):** `http://my-app-bluegreen-green-xxxxxx.elasticbeanstalk.com`

## 🔵 Testing the Blue Environment (Production - v1.0)

Visit the Blue environment URL. You should see:

- **Version 1.0** displayed prominently
- **Blue color scheme**
- **"PRODUCTION" badge**
- Basic feature set

## 🟢 Testing the Green Environment (Staging - v2.0)

Visit the Green environment URL. You should see:

- **Version 2.0** displayed prominently
- **Green color scheme**
- **"STAGING" badge**
- New features listed:
  - Refreshed UI with modern design
  - Improved performance
  - Enhanced security features
  - Better analytics tracking
  - Critical bug fixes

## 🔄 Performing the Blue-Green Swap

Once you've verified the Green environment is working correctly, perform the swap:

### Option 1: Using the PowerShell Script (Recommended)

```powershell
.\swap-environments.ps1
```

The script will:

1. Automatically read environment names from Terraform
2. Ask for confirmation
3. Perform the CNAME swap
4. Display status and next steps

### Option 2: Using AWS CLI Directly

```bash
aws elasticbeanstalk swap-environment-cnames \
  --source-environment-name my-app-bluegreen-blue \
  --destination-environment-name my-app-bluegreen-green \
  --region us-east-1
```

### Option 3: Using AWS Console (Step-by-Step with Screenshots)

**Step 1:** Open the AWS Console

- Navigate to [AWS Elastic Beanstalk Console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/elasticbeanstalk)
- Ensure you're in the correct region (us-east-1 by default)

**Step 2:** Select Your Application

- In the Applications list, click on **my-app-bluegreen**
- You'll see both environments listed (Blue and Green)

**Step 3:** Choose an Environment to Swap

- Click on either the **Blue** or **Green** environment name
- (You can start from either environment - the result is the same)

**Step 4:** Access the Swap Action

- Click the **Actions** button (top right)
- From the dropdown menu, select **Swap environment URLs**

**Step 5:** Select the Target Environment

- A dialog will appear asking which environment to swap with
- Select the other environment from the dropdown
  - If you started from Blue, select Green
  - If you started from Green, select Blue

**Step 6:** Confirm the Swap

- Review the warning message about traffic redirection
- Click the **Swap** button to confirm

**Step 7:** Monitor the Swap

- The environments will show "Updating" status
- Wait 1-2 minutes for the swap to complete
- Both environments will return to "Ok" (green) status

**Step 8:** Verify Success

- Note that the **URLs have been swapped**
- The environment names stay the same, but the URLs are exchanged
- Visit both URLs to confirm the swap worked

## ✅ Verifying the Swap

After the swap completes (1-2 minutes), verify:

1. **Blue URL now shows v2.0:**

   ```
   Visit: <blue-url>
   Expected: "Welcome to Version 2.0 - Green Environment"
   ```

2. **Green URL now shows v1.0:**

   ```
   Visit: <green-url>
   Expected: "Welcome to Version 1.0 - Blue Environment"
   ```

3. **Zero Downtime:** Your production traffic seamlessly moved from v1.0 to v2.0!

## 🔙 Rolling Back

If you need to rollback to the previous version:

```powershell
# Simply run the swap again!
.\swap-environments.ps1
```

The swap is instant and bidirectional - the previous production environment is still running the old version.

## 📊 Key Features Demonstrated

### 1. **Zero-Downtime Deployment**

- Traffic switches instantly at the DNS level
- No service interruption
- Users experience seamless transition

### 2. **Easy Rollback**

- Previous version still running in the other environment
- Instant rollback by swapping again
- No need to redeploy

### 3. **Safe Testing**

- Test new version in production-like environment
- Same infrastructure configuration
- Isolated from production traffic

### 4. **Production Parity**

- Both environments identical
- Same instance types, scaling, and configuration
- Eliminates "works on staging" issues

## 🏷️ Resource Tagging

All resources are tagged with:

- `Project: BlueGreenDeployment`
- `Environment: Demo`
- `ManagedBy: Terraform`

## 💰 Cost Considerations

This demo creates:

- 2 Application Load Balancers (~$16/month each)
- 2-4 EC2 instances (depending on auto-scaling)
- S3 bucket for application versions
- CloudWatch monitoring

**Estimated Monthly Cost:** $50-100 USD (depending on instance types and usage)

**To minimize costs:**

- Use `t3.micro` instances (default)
- Destroy resources when not in use: `terraform destroy`
- Set appropriate auto-scaling limits

## 🧹 Cleanup

To destroy all resources:

```bash
terraform destroy
```

**Warning:** This will delete:

- Both Elastic Beanstalk environments
- Application Load Balancers
- EC2 instances
- S3 bucket (if empty)
- All associated resources

## 📝 Customization

### Change AWS Region

Edit `variables.tf`:

```hcl
variable "aws_region" {
  default = "us-west-2"  # Change to your preferred region
}
```

### Change Instance Type

Edit `variables.tf`:

```hcl
variable "instance_type" {
  default = "t3.small"  # Upgrade for better performance
}
```

### Modify Application Name

Edit `variables.tf`:

```hcl
variable "app_name" {
  default = "my-custom-app"
}
```

## 🔍 Troubleshooting

### Environment Health Issues

Check environment health:

```bash
aws elasticbeanstalk describe-environment-health \
  --environment-name my-app-bluegreen-blue \
  --attribute-names All \
  --region us-east-1
```

### Deployment Failures

View recent events:

```bash
aws elasticbeanstalk describe-events \
  --environment-name my-app-bluegreen-blue \
  --max-records 50 \
  --region us-east-1
```

### Application Logs

Access logs through:

1. AWS Console → Elastic Beanstalk → Environment → Logs
2. Or request logs via CLI:

```bash
aws elasticbeanstalk request-environment-info \
  --environment-name my-app-bluegreen-blue \
  --info-type tail \
  --region us-east-1
```

## 🔗 Comparison with Azure

| Feature          | Azure App Service | AWS Elastic Beanstalk |
| ---------------- | ----------------- | --------------------- |
| Service Type     | PaaS              | PaaS                  |
| Deployment Slots | Native feature    | Separate Environments |
| Swap Mechanism   | Slot Swap         | CNAME Swap            |
| Swap Speed       | Instant           | 1-2 minutes           |
| Rollback         | One-click swap    | One-click swap        |
| Cost             | Per slot          | Per environment       |

## 📚 Learning Resources

- [AWS Elastic Beanstalk Documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/elasticbeanstalk/)
- [Blue-Green Deployment Best Practices](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/wellarchitected/latest/framework/welcome.html)
- [Terraform AWS Provider](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/aws/latest/docs)

## 🎓 What You've Learned

✅ How to implement blue-green deployments on AWS  
✅ Elastic Beanstalk environment management  
✅ Zero-downtime deployment strategies  
✅ Infrastructure as Code with Terraform  
✅ AWS CLI for environment swapping  
✅ Production-safe deployment practices

## Important Note:

- After running terraform apply, it is expected that Elastic Beanstalk creates an S3 bucket with a naming convention similar to
  elasticbeanstalk-us-east-your-accountid
- Even though you haven't explicitly defined this S3 bucket in your Terraform files, AWS Elastic Beanstalk automatically
  creates and manages an S3 bucket for each region you use it in. This bucket is used to store application source bundles,
  logs, and other deployment-related artifacts. The naming convention typically includes elasticbeanstalk, the AWS region,
  and your AWS account ID.
- Since your Terraform configuration (main.tf, blue-environment.tf, green-environment.tf) defines
  aws_elastic_beanstalk_application and aws_elastic_beanstalk_environment resources, Elastic Beanstalk will create this S3
  bucket as part of its service provisioning.
- The S3 bucket named elasticbeanstalk-us-east-your-accountid (or similar) is a
  service-managed resource by AWS Elastic Beanstalk, not a resource directly provisioned by your Terraform configuration.
- If you want to delete this S3 bucket, you will need to do so manually through the AWS Management Console, AWS CLI, or an
  AWS SDK. Ensure there are no critical artifacts before deletion.

## "aws_elastic_beanstalk_environment" Settings

| **Setting**    | **Why?**                                                                             |
| -------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| **IAM**        | Without `IamInstanceProfile`, the server can't download your code.                   |
| **Networking** | If you want a Load Balancer, you must set `EnvironmentType` to `LoadBalanced`.       |
| **Capacity**   | You must tell it the `InstanceType` (e.g., `t3.micro`) so you don't get a huge bill. |
| **Updates**    | You need `DeploymentPolicy` so your site doesn't go down during an update.           |
